
==== Front
04104626011NatureNatureNature0028-08361476-46872433621710.1038/nature12820nihpa536070ArticleDiet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut
microbiome David Lawrence A. 12#Maurice Corinne F. 1Carmody Rachel N. 1Gootenberg David B. 1Button Julie E. 1Wolfe Benjamin E. 1Ling Alisha V. 3Devlin A. Sloan 4Varma Yug 4Fischbach Michael A. 4Biddinger Sudha B. 3Dutton Rachel J. 1Turnbaugh Peter J. 1*1 FAS Center for Systems Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, 02138, USA.2 Society of Fellows, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA,
02138, USA.3 Division of Endocrinology, Children’s Hospital
Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.4 Department of Bioengineering & Therapeutic Sciences
and the California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94158, USA.* To whom correspondence should be addressed.
pturnbaugh@fas.harvard.edu# Present address: Mocular Genetics & Microbiology and
Institute for Genome Sciences & Policy, Duke University, Durham, NC,
27708.

16 12 2013 11 12 2013 23 1 2014 23 7 2014 505 7484 559 563 Users may view, print, copy, download and text and data- mine the
content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, subject
always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#termsLong-term diet influences the structure and activity of the trillions of
microorganisms residing in the human gut1–5, but it
remains unclear how rapidly and reproducibly the human gut microbiome responds
to short-term macronutrient change. Here, we show that the short-term
consumption of diets composed entirely of animal or plant products alters
microbial community structure and overwhelms inter-individual differences in
microbial gene expression. The animal-based diet increased the abundance of
bile-tolerant microorganisms (Alistipes, Bilophila, and
Bacteroides) and decreased the levels of Firmicutes that
metabolize dietary plant polysaccharides (Roseburia, Eubacterium
rectale, and Ruminococcus bromii). Microbial
activity mirrored differences between herbivorous and carnivorous
mammals2, reflecting
trade-offs between carbohydrate and protein fermentation. Foodborne microbes
from both diets transiently colonized the gut, including bacteria, fungi, and
even viruses. Finally, increases in the abundance and activity of
Bilophila wadsworthia on the animal-based diet support a
link between dietary fat, bile acids, and the outgrowth of microorganisms
capable of triggering inflammatory bowel disease6. In concert, these results demonstrate that the
gut microbiome can rapidly respond to altered diet, potentially facilitating the
diversity of human dietary lifestyles.
==== Body
There is growing concern that recent lifestyle innovations, most notably the
high-fat/high-sugar “Western” diet, have altered the genetic composition
and metabolic activity of our resident microorganisms (the human gut
microbiome)7. Such diet-induced
changes to gut-associated microbial communities are now suspected of contributing to
growing epidemics of chronic illness in the developed world, including obesity4,8
and inflammatory bowel disease6. Yet,
it remains unclear how quickly and reproducibly gut bacteria respond to dietary change.
Work in inbred mice shows that shifting dietary macronutrients can broadly and
consistently alter the gut microbiome within a single day7,9. By contrast,
dietary interventions in human cohorts have only measured community changes on
timescales of weeks10 to
months4, failed to find
significant diet-specific effects1, or
demonstrated responses among a limited number of bacterial taxa3,5.

Here, we examined if dietary interventions in humans can alter gut microbial
communities in a rapid, diet-specific manner. We prepared two diets that varied
according to their primary food source: a “plant-based diet”, which was
rich in grains, legumes, fruits, and vegetables; and an “animal-based
diet”, which was composed of meats, eggs, and cheeses (Supplementary Table 1). We picked
these sources to span the global diversity of modern human diets, which includes
exclusively plant-based and nearly exclusively animal-based regimes11 (the latter being the case among some
high-latitude and pastoralist cultures). Each diet was consumed ad
libitum for five consecutive days by six male and four female American
volunteers between the ages of 21–33, whose body mass indices ranged from
19–32 kg/m2 (Supplementary Table 2). Study volunteers were observed for four days before
each diet arm to measure normal eating habits (the baseline period) and for six days
after each diet arm to assess microbial recovery (the washout period; Extended Data Fig. 1).
Subjects’ baseline nutritional intake correlated well with their estimated
long-term diet (Supplementary Table
3). Our study cohort included a lifetime vegetarian (see
Supplementary Discussion, Extended Data Fig. 2, and Supplementary Table 4 for a detailed analysis of his diet and gut
microbiota).

Each diet arm significantly shifted subjects' macronutrient intake (Fig. 1a–c). On the animal-based diet, dietary
fat increased from 32.5±2.2% to 69.5±0.4% kcal and
dietary protein increased from 16.2±1.3% to 30.1±0.5%
kcal (p<0.01 for both comparisons, Wilcoxon signed-rank test; Supplementary Table 5). Fiber
intake was nearly zero, in contrast to baseline levels of 9.3±2.1 g/1,000kcal.
On the plant-based diet, fiber intake rose to 25.6±1.1 g/1,000kcal, while both
fat and protein intake declined to 22.1±1.7% and
10.0±0.3%, respectively (p<0.05 for all comparisons).
Subjects’ weights on the plant-based diet remained stable, but decreased
significantly by day 3 of the animal-based diet (q<0.05, Bonferroni-corrected
Mann-Whitney U test; Extended Data
Fig. 3). Differential weight loss between the two diets cannot be explained
simply by energy intake, as subjects consumed equal numbers of calories on the plant-
and animal-based diets (1,695±172 kcal and 1,777±221 kcal, respectively;
p=0.44).

To characterize temporal patterns of microbial community structure, we performed
16S rRNA gene sequencing on samples collected each day of the study (Supplementary Table 6). We
quantified the microbial diversity within each subject at a given time-point
(α-diversity) and the difference between each subjects' baseline and
diet-associated gut microbiota (β-diversity) (Fig.
1d,e). Although no significant differences in α-diversity were
detected on either diet, we observed a significant increase in β-diversity that
was unique to the animal-based diet (q<0.05, Bonferroni-corrected Mann-Whitney U
test). This change occurred a single day after the diet reached the distal gut
microbiota (as indicated by the food tracking dye; Extended Data Fig. 3a).
Subjects’ gut microbiota reverted to their original structure 2 days after the
animal-based diet ended (Fig. 1e).

Analysis of the relative abundance of bacterial taxonomic groups supported our
finding that the animal-based diet had a greater impact on the gut microbiota than the
plant-based diet (Fig. 2). We hierarchically
clustered species-level bacterial phylotypes by the similarity of their dynamics across
diets and subjects (see Supplementary
Methods and Supplementary
Tables 7 and 8). Statistical testing identified 22 clusters whose abundance
significantly changed while on the animal-based diet, while only 3 clusters showed
significant abundance changes while on the plant-based diet (q<0.05, Wilcoxon
signed-rank test; Supplementary Table
9). Notably, the genus Prevotella, one of the leading
sources of inter-individual gut microbiota variation12 and hypothesized to be sensitive to long-term fiber
intake1,13, was reduced in our vegetarian subject during
consumption of the animal-based diet (see Supplementary Discussion). We
also observed a significant positive correlation between subjects’ fiber intake
over the past year and baseline gut Prevotella levels (Extended Data Fig. 4 and Supplementary Table 10).

To identify functional traits linking clusters that thrived on the animal-based
diet, we selected the most abundant taxon in the three most-enriched clusters
(Bilophila wadsworthia, Cluster 28; Alistipes
putredinis, Cluster 26; and a Bacteroides sp., Cluster
29), and performed a literature search for their lifestyle traits. That search quickly
yielded a common theme of bile-resistance for these taxa, which is consistent with
observations that high fat intake causes more bile acids to be secreted14.

Analysis of fecal SCFAs and bacterial clusters suggests that macronutrient shifts
on both diets also altered microbial metabolic activity. Relative to the plant-based
diet and baseline samples, the animal-based diet resulted in significantly lower levels
of the products of carbohydrate fermentation and a higher concentration of the products
of amino acid fermentation (Fig. 3a,b; Supplementary Table 11). When we
correlated subjects’ SCFA concentrations with the same-day abundance of
bacterial clusters from Fig. 2, we found
significant positive relationships between clusters composed of putrefactive
microbes15,16 (i.e. Alistipes
putredinis and Bacteroides spp.) and SCFAs that are the
end products of amino acid fermentation (Extended Data Fig. 5). We also observed significant positive
correlations between clusters comprised of saccharolytic microbes3 (e.g.
Roseburia, E. rectale, and F.
prausnitzii) and the products of carbohydrate fermentation.

In order to test whether the observed changes in microbial community structure
and metabolic end products were accompanied by more widespread shifts in the gut
microbiome, we measured microbial gene expression using RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq). A
subset of samples was analyzed, targeting the baseline periods and the final 2 days of
each diet (Extended Data Fig.
1, Supplementary Table
12). We identified several differentially-expressed metabolic modules and
pathways during the plant- and animal-based diets (Supplementary Tables 13 and 14).
The animal-based diet was associated with increased expression of key genes for vitamin
biosynthesis (Fig. 3c); the degradation of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (Fig. 3d), which
are carcinogenic compounds produced during the charring of meat17; and the increased expression of
β-lactamase genes (Fig. 3e). Metagenomic
models constructed from our 16S rRNA data18 suggest that the observed expression differences are due to a
combination of regulatory and taxonomic shifts within the microbiome (Supplementary Tables 15 and
16).

We next hierarchically-clustered microbiome samples based on the transcription
of KEGG orthologous groups19, which
suggested that overall microbial gene expression was strongly linked to host diet.
Nearly all of the diet samples could be clustered by diet arm (p<0.003,
Fisher’s exact test; Fig. 3f), despite the
pre-existing inter-individual variation we observed during the baseline diets (Extended Data Fig. 6a,b). Still,
subjects maintained their inter-individual differences on a taxonomic level on the diet
arms (Extended Data Fig. 6c).
Of the three RNA-Seq samples on the animal-based diet that clustered with samples from
the plant-based diet, all were taken on day 3 of the diet arm. In contrast, all RNA-Seq
samples from the final day of the diet arms (day 4) clustered by diet (Fig. 3f).

Remarkably, the plant- and animal-based diets also elicited transcriptional
responses that were consistent with known differences in gene abundance between the gut
microbiomes of herbivorous and carnivorous mammals, such as the tradeoffs between amino
acid catabolism versus biosynthesis, and in the interconversions of phosphoenolpyruvate
(PEP) and oxaloacetate2 (Fig. 3g,h). The former pathway favors amino acid
catabolism when protein is abundant2,
and we speculate that the latter pathway produces PEP for aromatic amino acid synthesis
when protein is scarce20. In all 14
steps of these pathways, we observed fold-changes in gene expression on the plant- and
animal-based diets whose directions agreed with the previously reported differences
between herbivores and carnivores (p<0.001, Binomial test). Notably, this
perfect agreement is not observed when the plant- and animal-based diets are only
compared to their respective baseline periods, indicating that the expression patterns
in Fig. 3g,h reflect functional changes from both
diet arms (Supplementary Table
17).

Our findings that the human gut microbiome can rapidly switch between
herbivorous and carnivorous functional profiles may reflect past selective pressures
during human evolution. Consumption of animal foods by our ancestors was likely
volatile, depending on season and stochastic foraging success, with readily available
plant foods offering a fallback source of calories and nutrients21. Microbial communities that could
quickly, and appropriately, shift their functional repertoire in response to diet change
would have subsequently enhanced human dietary flexibility. Examples of this flexibility
may persist today in the form of the wide diversity of modern human diets11.

We next examined if, in addition to affecting the resident gut microbiota, either
diet arm introduced foreign microorganisms into the distal gut. We identified foodborne
bacteria on both diets using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. The cheese and cured meats
included in the animal-based diet were dominated by lactic acid bacteria commonly used
as starter cultures for fermented foods22,23: Lactococcus
lactis, Pediococcus acidilactici, and
Streptococcus thermophilus (Fig.
4a). Common non-lactic acid bacteria included several
Staphylococcus taxa; strains from this genus are often used when
making fermented sausages23. During
the animal-based diet, three of the bacteria associated with cheese and cured meats
(L. lactis, P. acidilactici, and
Staphylococcus) became significantly more prevalent in fecal
samples (p<0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test; Extended Data Fig. 7c),
indicating that bacteria found in common fermented foods can reach the gut at abundances
above the detection limit of our sequencing experiments (on average 1 in
4×104 gut bacteria; Supplementary Table 6).

We also sequenced the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of the rRNA
operon from community DNA extracted from food and fecal samples to study the
relationship between diet and enteric fungi, which to date remains poorly characterized
(Supplementary Table 18).
Menu items on both diets were colonized by the genera Candida,
Debaryomyces, Penicillium, and
Scopulariopsis (Fig. 4a and
Extended Data Fig. 7a),
which are often found in fermented foods22. A Penicillium sp. and Candida
sp. were consumed in sufficient quantities on the animal- and plant-based diets to show
significant ITS sequence increases on those respective diet arms (Extended Data Fig. 7b,c).

Microbial culturing and re-analysis of our RNA-Seq data suggested that foodborne
microbes survived transit through the digestive system and may have been metabolically
active in the gut. Mapping RNA-Seq reads to an expanded reference set of 4,688 genomes
(see Supplementary Methods)
revealed a significant increase on the animal-based diet for transcripts expressed by
food-associated bacteria (Fig. 4b–d) and
fungi (Fig. 4e; q<0.1, Kruskal-Wallis
test). Many dairy-associated microbes remained viable after passing through the
digestive tract, as we isolated 19 bacterial and fungal strains with high genetic
similarity (>97% ITS or 16S rRNA) to microbes cultured from cheeses fed
to the subjects (Supplementary Table
19). Moreover, L. lactis was more abundant in fecal cultures
sampled after the animal-based diet, relative to samples from the preceding baseline
period (p<0.1; Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test). We also detected an overall increase
in the fecal concentration of viable fungi on the animal-based diet (Fig. 4f; p<0.02; Mann-Whitney U test).
Interestingly, we detected RNA transcripts from multiple plant viruses Extended Data Fig. 8). One plant
pathogen, Rubus chlorotic mottle virus, was only detectable on the plant-based diet
(Fig. 4g). This virus infects spinach24, which was a key ingredient in the
prepared meals on the plant-based diet. These data support the hypothesis that plant
pathogens can reach the human gut via consumed plant matter25.

Finally, we found that microbiota changes on the animal-based diet could be
linked to altered fecal bile acid profiles and the potential for human enteric disease.
Recent mouse experiments have shown high-fat diets lead to increased enteric deoxycholic
concentrations (DCA); this secondary bile acid is the product of microbial metabolism
and promotes liver cancer26. In our
study, the animal-based diet significantly increased the levels of fecal DCA (Fig. 5a). Expression of bacterial genes encoding
microbial bile salt hydrolases, which are prerequisites for gut microbial production of
DCA27, also exhibited
significantly higher expression on the animal-based diet (Fig. 5b). Elevated DCA levels in turn, may have contributed to the microbial
disturbances on the animal-based diet, as this bile acid can inhibit the growth of
members of the Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes phyla28.

Mouse models have also found evidence that inflammatory bowel disease can be
caused by B. wadsworthia, a sulfite-reducing bacterium whose production
of H2S is thought to inflame intestinal tissue6. Growth of B. wadsworthia is stimulated
in mice by select bile acids secreted while consuming saturated fats from milk. Our
study provides several lines of evidence confirming that B. wadsworthia
growth in humans can also be promoted by a high-fat diet. First, we observed B.
wadsworthia to be a major component of the bacterial cluster that increased
most strongly while on the animal-based diet (C28; Fig.
2 and Supplementary Table
8). This Bilophila-containing cluster also showed
significant positive correlations with both long-term dairy (p<0.05; Spearman
correlation) and baseline saturated fat intake (Supplementary Table 20), supporting the proposed link to
milk-associated saturated fats6.
Second, the animal-based diet led to significantly increased fecal bile acid
concentrations (Fig. 5c and Extended Data Fig. 9). Third, we
observed significant increases in the abundance of microbial DNA and RNA encoding
sulfite reductases on the animal-based diet (Fig.
5d,e). Together, these findings are consistent with the hypothesis that
diet-induced changes to the gut microbiota may contribute to the development of
inflammatory bowel disease. More broadly, our results emphasize that a more
comprehensive understanding of diet-related diseases will benefit from elucidating links
between nutritional, biliary, and microbial dynamics.

Methods
Sample collection
We recruited 11 unrelated subjects (n=10 per diet; 9 individuals
completed both arms of the study). One participant suffered from a chronic
gastrointestinal disease, but all other volunteers were otherwise healthy. The
volunteers’ normal bowel frequencies ranged from three times a day to
once every other day. Three participants had taken antibiotics in the past year.
Additional subject information is provided in Supplementary Table 2.
Gut microbial communities were sampled from feces. Subjects were instructed to
collect no more than one sample per day, but to log all bowel movements. No
microbiota patterns were observed as a function of sampling time of day (data
not shown). Subjects collected samples by placing disposable commode specimen
containers (Claflin Medical Equipment, Warwick, RI) under their toilet seats
before bowel movements. CultureSwabs™ (BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ) were then
used to collect fecal specimens for sequencing analyses, and larger collection
tubes were provided for harvesting larger, intact stool samples (~10g)
for metabolic analyses. Each sample was either frozen immediately at
−80°C or briefly stored in personal −20°C
freezers before transport to the laboratory.

Diet design
We constructed two diet arms, each of which consisted mostly of plant-
or animal-based foods (Extended Data Fig. 1). Subjects on the plant-based diet ate cereal
for breakfast and precooked meals made of vegetables, rice, and lentils for
lunch and dinner (see Supplementary Table 1 for a full list of diet ingredients). Fresh
and dried fruits were provided as snacks on this diet. Subjects on the
animal-based diet ate eggs and bacon for breakfast, and cooked pork and beef for
lunch. Dinner consisted of cured meats and a selection of four cheeses. Snacks
on this diet included pork rinds, cheese, and salami. Ingredients for the
plant-based diet, dinner meats and cheeses for the animal-based diet, and snacks
for both diets were purchased from grocery stores. Lunchmeats for the
animal-based diet were prepared by a restaurant that was instructed to not add
sauce to the food. On each diet arm, subjects were instructed to eat only
provided foods or allowable beverages (water or unsweetened tea for both diets;
coffee was allowed on the animal-based diet). They were also allowed to add 1
salt packet per meal, if desired for taste. Subjects could eat unlimited amounts
of the provided foods. Outside of the five-day diet arms, subjects were
instructed to eat normally.

Food logs, subject metadata, and dietary questionnaires
Subjects were given notepads to log their diet, health, and bowel
movements during the study. Subjects transcribed their notepads into digital
spreadsheets when the study ended. Each ingested food (including foods on the
diet arm) was recorded, as well as data on time, location, portion size, and
food brand. Subjects were provided with pocket digital scales (American Weigh,
Norcross, GA) and a visual serving size guide to aid with quantifying the amount
of food consumed. Each day, subjects tracked their weight using either a scale
provided in the lab, or their own personal scales at home. While on the
animal-based diet, subjects were requested to measure their urinary ketone
levels using provided Ketostix strips (Bayer, Leverkusen, Germany; Extended Data Fig. 1). if
subjects recorded a range of ketone levels (the Ketostix color key uses a
range-based reporting system), the middle value of that range was used for
further analysis. Subjects were encouraged to record any discomfort they
experienced while on either diet (e.g. bloating, constipation).
Subjects tracked all bowel movements, regardless of whether or not they
collected samples, recording movement time, date, and location, and
qualitatively documented stool color, odor, and type1. Subjects were also asked to report when they observed
stool staining from food dyes consumed at the beginning and end of each diet arm
(Extended Data Fig.
3a).

Diet quantification
We quantified subjects' daily nutritional intake during the
study using CalorieKing and Nutrition Data System for Research (NDSR). The
CalorieKing™ food database (La Mesa, CA) was accessed via the
CalorieKing Nutrition & Exercise Manager software (version 4.1.0).
Subjects' food items were manually transferred from digital spreadsheets
into the CalorieKing software, which then tabulated each food's
nutritional content. Macronutrient content per serving was calculated for each
of the prepared meals on the animal- and plant-based diet using lists of those
meals’ ingredients. Nutritional data was outputted from CalorieKing in
CSV format and parsed for further analysis using a custom Python script. NDSR
intake data were collected and analyzed using Nutrition Data System for Research
software version 2012, developed by the Nutrition Coordinating Center (NCC),
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN. We estimated subjects'
long-term diet using the National Cancer Institute’s Diet History
Questionnaire II2 (DHQ). We used the DHQ
to quantify subjects' annual diet intake, decomposed into 176
nutritional categories. Subjects completed the yearly, serving size-included
version of the DHQ online using their personal computers. We parsed the
survey's results using the Diet*Calc software (version 1.5; Risk Factor
Monitoring and Methods Branch, NCI) and its supplied 'Food and Nutrient
Database', and 'dhqweb.yearly.withserv.2010.qdd' QDD
file.

There was good agreement between subjects’ diets as measured by
CalorieKing, the NDSR, and the DHQ: 18 of 20 nutritional comparisons between
pairs of databases showed significant correlations (Supplementary Table 3).
Unless specified, nutritional data presented in this manuscript reflect
CalorieKing measurements.

16S rRNA gene sequencing and processing
Temporal patterns of microbial community structure were analyzed from
daily fecal samples collected across each diet (Extended Data Fig. 1).
Samples were kept at −80°C until DNA extraction with the
PowerSoil bacterial DNA extraction kit (MoBio, Carlsbad CA). The V4 region of
the 16S rRNA gene was PCR amplified in triplicate, and the resulting amplicons
were cleaned, quantified, and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq platform according
to published protocols3,4 and using custom barcoded primers (Supplementary Table 6).
Raw sequences were processed using the QIIME software package (Quantitative
Insights Into Microbial Ecology)5. Only full-length, high-quality reads (−r=0) were used for analysis. Operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were picked
at 97% similarity against the Greengenes database6 (constructed by the
nested_gg_workflow.py QiimeUtils script on 4 Feb 2011), which we trimmed to span
only the 16S rRNA region flanked by our sequencing primers (positions
521–773). In total, we characterized an average of 43,589±1,826
16S rRNA sequences for 235 samples (an average of 0.78 samples per person per
study day; Supplementary Table
6). Most of the subsequent analysis of 16S rRNA data, including
calculations of α- and β-diversity, were performed using custom
Python scripts, the SciPy Python library7, and the Pandas Data Analysis Library8. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing utilized the fdrtool9
R library, except in the case of small test numbers, in which case the
Bonferroni correction was used.

OTU clustering
We used clustering to simplify the dynamics of thousands of OTUs into a
limited number of variables that could be more easily visualized and manually
inspected. Clustering was performed on normalized OTU abundances. Such
abundances are traditionally computed by scaling each sample's reads to
sum to a fixed value (e.g. unity); this technique is intended
to account for varying sequencing depth between samples. However, this standard
technique may cause false relationships to be inferred between microbial taxa,
as increases in the abundance of one microbial group will cause decreases in the
fractional abundance of other microbes (this artifact is known as a
“compositional” effect10). To avoid compositional biases, we employed an alternative
normalization approach, which instead assumes that no more than half of the OTUs
held in common between two microbial samples change in abundance. This method
uses a robust (outlier-resistant) regression to estimate the median OTU
fold-change between communities, by which it subsequently rescales all OTUs.

To further simplify community dynamics, we only included in our
clustering model OTUs that comprised 95% of total reads (after ranking
by normalized abundance). Abundances for each included OTU were then converted
to log-space and mediancentered.

We computed OTU pairwise distances using the Pearson correlation (OTU
abundances across all subjects and time points were used). The resulting
distance matrix was subsequently input into Scipy's hierarchical
clustering function ('fcluster'). Default parameters were used
for fcluster, with the exception of the clustering criterion, which was set to
'distance', and the clustering threshold, which was set to
'0.7'. These parameters were selected manually so that cluster
boundaries visually agreed with the correlation patterns plotted in a matrix of
pairwise OTU distances.

Statistics on cluster abundance during baseline and diet periods were
computed by taking median values across date ranges. Baseline date ranges were
the 4 days preceding each diet arm (i.e. days −4 through −1).
Date ranges for the diet arms were chosen so as to capture the full effects of
each diet. These ranges were not expected to perfectly overlap with the diet
arms themselves, due to the effects of diet transit time. We therefore chose
diet arm date ranges that accounted for transit time (as measured by food
dye; Extended Data Fig.
3a), picking ranges that began 1 day after foods reached the gut, and
ended 1 day before the last diet arm meal reached the gut. These criteria led
microbial abundance measurements on the plant-based diet to span days
2–4 of that study arm, and animal-based diet measurements to span days
2–5 of that diet arm.

RNA-Seq sample preparation and sequencing
In order to test if the observed changes in community structure were
accompanied by changes to the active subset of the human gut microbiome, we
measured communitywide gene expression using meta-transcriptomics11–14 (RNA sequencing, RNA-Seq; Supplementary Table 12). Samples were selected based on our
prior 16S rRNA gene sequencing-based analysis, representing 3 baseline days and
2 timepoints on each diet (n=5–10 samples/timepoint; Extended Data Fig. 1).
Microbial cells were lysed by a bead beater (BioSpec Products, Bartlesville,
OK), total RNA was extracted with phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (pH 4.5,
125:24:1, Ambion 9720) and purified using Ambion MEGAClear columns (Life
Technologies, Grand Island, NY), and rRNA was depleted via Ambion MICROBExpress
subtractive hybridization (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) and custom
depletion oligos. The presence of genomic DNA contamination was assessed by PCR
with universal 16S rRNA gene primers. cDNA was synthesized using SuperScript II
and random hexamers ordered from Invitrogen (Life Technologies, Grand Island,
NY), followed by second strand synthesis with RNaseH and E.coli
DNA polymerase (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA). Samples were prepared for
sequencing with an Illumina HiSeq instrument after enzymatic fragmentation
(NEBE6040L/M0348S). Libraries were quantified by quantitative reverse
transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR) according to the Illumina protocol. qRT-PCR assays
were run using ABsoluteTM QPCR SYBR® Green ROX Mix (Thermo Scientific,
Waltham, MA) on a Mx3000P QPCR System instrument (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). The
size distribution of each library was quantified on an Agilent HS-DNA chip.
Libraries were sequenced using the Illumina HiSeq platform.

Functional analysis of RNA-Seq data
We used a custom reference database of bacterial genomes to perform
functional analysis of the RNA-Seq data12. This reference included 538 draft and finished bacterial genomes
obtained from human-associated microbial isolates15, and the Eggerthella lenta DSM2243 reference
genome. All predicted proteins from the reference genome database were annotated
with KEGG16 orthologous groups (KOs)
using the KEGG database (version 52; BLASTX e-value<10–5, Bit
score>50, and >50% identity). for query genes with
multiple matches, the annotated reference gene with the lowest evalue was used.
When multiple annotated genes with an identical e-value were encountered after a
BLAST query, we included all KOs assigned to those genes. Genes from the
database with significant homology (BLASTN e-value<10–20) to
non-coding transcripts from the 539 microbial genomes were excluded from
subsequent analysis. High-quality reads (see Supplementary Table 12
for sequencing statistics) were mapped using SSAHA217, to our reference bacterial database and the Illumina
adaptor sequences (SSAHA2 parameters: “-best 1 -score 20
-solexa”). The number of transcripts assigned to each gene was then
tallied and normalized to reads per kilobase per million mapped reads (RPKM). To
account for genes that were not detected due to limited sequencing depth, a
pseudocount of 0.01 was added to all samples. Samples were clustered in Matlab
(version 7.10.0) using a Spearman distance matrix (commands: pdist, linkage, and
dendrogram). Genes were grouped by taxa, genomes, and KEGG orthologous groups
(KOs) by calculating the cumulative RPKM for each sample. HUMAnN18 was used for metabolic reconstruction
from metagenomic data followed by LefSe19
analysis to identify significant biomarkers. A modified version of the
“SConstruct” file was used to input KEGG orthologous group
counts into the HUMAnN pipeline for each RNA-Seq dataset. We then ran LefSe on
the resulting KEGG module abundance file using the “-o 1000000”
flag.

Taxonomic analysis of RNA-Seq data
We used Bowtie 2 read alignment program20 and the Integrated Microbial Genomes (IMG; version 3.5)
database21 to map RNA-Seq reads to a
comprehensive reference survey of prokaryotic, eukaryotic, and viral genomes.
Our reference survey included all 2,809 viral genomes in IMG (as of version
3.5), a set of 1,813 bacterial and archaeal genomes selected to minimize strain
redundancy22, and 66 genomes spanning
the Eukarya except for the plants and non-nematode Bilateria. Reads were mapped
to reference genomes using Bowtie, which was configured to analyze mated
paired-end reads, and return fragments with a minimum length of 150bp and a
maximum length of 600bp. All other parameters were left to their default values.
The number of base pairs in the reference genome dataset exceeded
Bowtie's reference size limit, so we split the reference genomes into
four subsets. Each read was mapped to each of these four subreference datasets,
and the results were merged by picking the highest-scoring match across the
sub-references. We settled tied scores by randomly choosing one of the
best-scoring matches. To more precisely measure the presence or absence of
specific taxa, we next filtered out reads that mapped to more than reference
sequence. Raw read counts were computed for each reference genome by counting
the number of reads that mapped to coding sequences according to the IMG
annotations; these counts were subsequently normalized using RPKM scaling. Our
analysis pipeline associated several sequences with marine algae, which are
unlikely to colonize the human gut. We also detected a fungal pathogen
exclusively in samples from subjects consuming the animal-based diet
(Neosartorya fischeri); this taxon was suspected of being a
misidentified cheese fungus, due to its relatedness to
Penicillium. We thus reanalysed protist and N.
fischeri reads associated with potentially mis-annotated taxa using
BLAST searches against the NCBI non-redundant database, and we assigned taxonomy
manually based on the most common resulting hits (Extended Data Fig.
8).

Quantitative PCR
Community DNA was isolated with the PowerSoil bacterial DNA extraction
kit (MoBio, Carlsbad CA). To determine the presence of hydrogen consumers, PCR
was performed on fecal DNA using the following primer sets: (i) Sulfite
reductase23 (dsrA), F-5’-
CCAACATGCACGGYT CCA-3’,
R-5’-CGTCGAACTTGAACTTGAACTTGTAGG-3’; and (ii) Sulfate
reduction24,25 (aps reductase),
F-5’-TGGCAGATMATGATYMACGG-3’, R-5’-
GGGCCGTAACCGTCCTTGAA-3’. qPCR assays were run using ABsoluteTM QPCR
SYBR® Green ROX Mix (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) on a Mx3000P QPCR
System instrument (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). Fold-changes were calculated
relative to the 16S rRNA gene using the 2-ΔΔCt method and the
same primers used for 16S rRNA gene sequencing.

Short-chain fatty acid measurements
Fecal SCFA content was determined by gas chromatography. Chromatographic
analysis was carried out using a Shimadzu GC14-A system with a flame ionization
detector (FID) (Shimadzu Corp, Kyoto, Japan). Fused silica capillary columns 30m
× 0.25 mm coated with 0.25um film thickness were used (Nukol™
for the volatile acids and SPB™-1000 for the nonvolatile acids (Supelco
Analytical, Bellefonte, PA). Nitrogen was used as the carrier gas. The oven
temperature was 170°C and the FID and injection port was set to
225°C. The injected sample volume was 2 µL and the run time for
each analysis was 10 minutes. The chromatograms and data integration was carried
out using a Shimadzu C-R5A Chromatopac. A volatile acid mix containing 10 mM of
acetic, propionic, isobutyric, butyric, isovaleric, valeric, isocaproic,
caproic, and heptanoic acids was used (Matreya, Pleasant Gap, PA). A
non-volatile acid mix containing 10 mM of pyruvic and lactic and 5 mM of
oxalacetic, oxalic, methy malonic, malonic, fumaric, and succinic was used
(Matreya, Pleasant Gap, PA). A standard stock solution containing 1%
2-methyl pentanoic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was prepared as an
internal standard control for the volatile acid extractions. A standard stock
solution containing 50 mM benzoic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was
prepared as an internal standard control for the non-volatile acid
extractions.

Samples were kept frozen at −80°C until analysis. The
samples were removed from the freezer and 1,200µL of water was added to
each thawed sample. The samples were vortexed for 1 minute until the material
was homogenized. The pH of the suspension was adjusted to 2–3 by adding
50 µL of 50% sulfuric acid. The acidified samples were kept at
room temperature for 5 minutes and vortexed briefly every minute. The samples
were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 5,000g. 500 µL of the clear
supernatant was transferred into two tubes for further processing. For the
volatile extraction 50 µL of the internal standard (1% 2-methyl
pentanoic acid solution) and 500 µL of ethyl ether anhydrous were added.
The tubes were vortexed for 30 seconds and then centrifuged at 5,000g for 10
minutes. 1 µL of the upper ether layer was injected into the
chromatogram for analysis. For the nonvolatile extraction 50 µL of the
internal standard (50 mM benzoic acid solution) and 500 µL of boron
trifluoride-methanol solution (Sigma-Aldrich St. Louis, MO) were added to each
tube. These tubes were incubated overnight at room temperature. 1 mL of water
and 500 µL of chloroform were added to each tube. The tubes were
vortexed for 30 seconds and then centrifuged at 5,000g for 10 minutes. 1
µL of the lower chloroform layer was injected into the chromatogram for
analysis. 500 µL of each standard mix was used and the extracts prepared
as described for the samples. The retention times and peak heights of the acids
in the standard mix were used as references for the sample unknowns. These acids
were identified by their specific retention times and the concentrations
determined and expressed as mM concentrations per gram of sample.

Bulk bile acid quantification
Fecal bile acid concentration was measured as described previously26. 100 mg of lyophilized stool was heated
to 195°C in 1 mL of ethylene glycol KOH for 2 hours, neutralized with 1
mL of saline and 0.2 mL of concentrated HCl, and extracted into 6 mL of diethyl
ether 3 times. After evaporation of the ether, the sample residues were
dissolved in 6 mL of methanol and subjected to enzymatic analysis. Enzymatic
reaction mixtures consisted of 66.5 mmol/L Tris, 0.33 mmol/L EDTA, 0.33 mol/L
hydrazine hydrate, 0.77 mmol/L NAD (N 7004, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO),
0.033U/mL 3〈- hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO) and either sample or standard (taurocholic acid; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO) dissolved in methanol. After 90 minutes of incubation at 37°C,
absorbance was measured at 340 nm.

Measurement of primary and secondary bile acids
Profiling of fecal primary and secondary bile acids was performed using
a modified version of a method described previously27. To a suspension of ~100 mg of stool and 0.25 mL
of water in a 1 dram Teflon-capped glass vial was added 200 mg of glass beads.
The suspension was homogenized by vortexing for 60–90 seconds. Ethanol
(1.8 mL) was added, and the suspension was heated with stirring in a heating
block at 80°C for 1.5 h. The sample was cooled, transferred to a 2 mL
Eppendorf tube, and centrifuged at 13500 rpm for 1–2 min. The
supernatant was removed and retained. The pellet was resuspended in 1.8 mL of
80% aqueous ethanol, transferred to the original vial, and heated to
80°C for 1.5 h. The sample was centrifuged again, and the supernatant
was removed and added to the first extraction supernatant. The pellet was
resuspended in 1.8 mL of chloroform:methanol (1:1 v/v) and refluxed for
30–60 min. The sample was centrifuged, and the supernatant removed and
concentrated to dryness on a rotary evaporator. The ethanolic supernatants were
added to the same flask, the pH was adjusted to neutrality by adding aqueous
0.01N HCl, and the combined extracts were evaporated to dryness. The dried
extract was resuspended in 1 mL of 0.01N aqueous HCl by sonication for 30 min. A
BIO-RAD Poly-Prep chromatography column (0.8×4cm) was loaded with
Lipidex 1000 as a slurry in MeOH, allowed to pack under gravity to a final
volume of 1.1 mL, and washed with 10 mL of distilled water. The suspension was
filtered through the bed of Lipidex 1000 and the effluent was discarded. The
flask was washed with 3 × 1 mL of 0.01N HCl, the washings were passed
through the gel, and the bed was washed with 4 mL of distilled water. Bile acids
and sterols were recovered by elution of the Lipidex gel bed with 8 mL of
methanol. A BIO-RAD Poly-Prep chromatography column (0.8×4cm) was loaded
with washed SP-Sephadex as a slurry in 72% aqueous MeOH to a final
volume of 1.1 mL. The methanolic extract was passed through the SP-Sephadex
column, and the column was washed with 4 mL of 72% aqueous methanol. The
extract and wash were combined, and the pH was brought to neutral with 0.04N
aqueous NaOH. A BIO-RAD Poly-Prep chromatography column (0.8×4cm) was
loaded with Lipidex-DEAP, prepared in the acetate form, as a slurry in
72% aqueous MeOH to a final volume of 1.1 mL. The combined neutralized
effluent was applied to the column, and the solution was eluted using air gas
pressure (flow rate ~25 mL/h). The flask and column were washed with 2
× 2 mL of 72% aqueous ethanol, and the sample and washings were
combined to give a fraction of neutral compounds including sterols. Unconjugated
bile acids were eluted using 4 mL of 0.1 M acetic acid in 72% (v/v)
aqueous ethanol that had been adjusted to pH 4.0 by addition of concentrated
ammonium hydroxide. The fraction containing bile acids was concentrated zto
dryness on a rotary evaporator.

The bile acids were converted to their corresponding methyl ester
derivatives by the addition of 0.6 mL of MeOH followed by 40 µL of a 2.0
M solution of (trimethylsilyl)diazomethane in diethyl ether. The solution was
divided in half, and each half of the sample was concentrated to dryness on a
rotary evaporator. The bile acids in the first half of the sample were converted
to their corresponding trimethylsilyl ether derivatives by the addition of 35
µL of a 2:1 solution of N,Obis(trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide and
chlorotrimethylsilane and analyzed by GC-MS. The identities of individual bile
acids were determined by comparison of retention time and fragmentation pattern
to known standards. Both the ratio of cholest-3-ene to deoxycholic acid in the
sample and the amount of internal standard to be added were determined by
integrating peak areas. A known amount of the internal standard, 5®-
cholestane-3®-ol (5®-coprostanol), was added to the second half
of the sample (0.003– 0.07 mmol). The bile acids in the second half of
the sample were converted to their corresponding trimethylsilyl ether
derivatives by the addition of 35 µL of a 2:1 solution of
N,O-bis(trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide and chlorotrimethylsilane and analyzed
by GCMS. Amounts of individual bile acids were determined by dividing integrated
bile acid peak area by the internal standard peak area, multiplying by the
amount of internal standard added, and then dividing by half of the mass of
fecal matter extracted. In the event that the first half of the sample contained
cholest-3-ene, the coprostanol peak area in the second half of the sample was
corrected by subtracting the area of the cholest-3-ene peak, determined by
applying the cholest-3-ene:deoxycholic acid ratio calculated from the first half
of the sample.

ITS sequencing
Fungal amplicon libraries were constructed with primers that target the
internal transcribed spacer (ITS), a region of the nuclear ribosomal RNA cistron
shown to promote successful identification across a broad range of fungal
taxa28. We selected primers
(ITS1f29 and ITS230) focused on the ITS1 region because it
provided the best discrimination between common cheese-associated fungi in
preliminary in silico tests. Multiplex capability was achieved
by adding Golay barcodes to the ITS2 primer. Due to relatively low
concentrations, fungal DNA was amplified in three serial PCR reactions, with the
first reaction using 1 ul of the PowerSoil DNA extract, and the subsequent two
reactions using 1 ul of the preceding PCR product as the template. In each round
of PCR, sample reactions were performed in triplicate and then combined.
Barcoded amplicons were cleaned, quantified and pooled to achieve approximately
equal amounts of DNA from each sample using methods identical to those used for
16S. We gel purified the pool, targeting amplicons between 150 bp and 500 bp in
size, and submitted it for Illumina sequencing.

Preliminary taxonomic assignments of ITS reads using the 12_11 UNITE
OTUs ITS database (see http://qiime.org) resulted in many
unassigned reads. To improve the percentage of reads assigned, we created our
own custom database of ITS1 sequences. We extracted ITS sequences from GenBank
by targeting specific collections of reliable ITS sequences (e.g. AFTOL, Fungal
Barcoding Consortium) and by searching for sequences of yeasts and filamentous
fungi that have been previously isolated from dairy and other food ecosystems.
We also retrieved a wider range of fungi for our database by searching GenBank
with the query internal transcribed spacer[All Fields] AND fungi NOT
‘uncultured’. Sequences that did not contain the
full ITS1 were removed. We also included reference OTUs that were identified as
widespread cheese fungi in a survey of cheese rinds (Wolfe, Button, and Dutton,
unpublished data), but were not in public databases.

Microbial culturing
Fecal samples were cultured under conditions permissive for growth of
food-derived microbes. Fecal samples were suspended in a volume of
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) equivalent to ten times their weight. Serial
dilutions were prepared and plated on brain heart infusion agar (BD Biosciences,
San Jose, CA), supplemented with 100ug/ml cycloheximide, an antifungal agent,
and plate count agar with milk and salt (per liter: 5g tryptone, 2.5g yeast
extract, 1g dextrose, 1g whole milk powder, 30g NaCl, 15g agar) supplemented
with 50ug/ml chloramphenicol, an antibacterial agent. Plates were incubated
under aerobic conditions at room temperature for 7 days. Plates supplemented
with chloramphenicol which yielded significant growth of bacteria, as determined
by colony morphology, were excluded from further analysis. Plates were examined
by eye for bacterial colonies or fungal foci whose morphological characteristics
were similar to previously characterized food-derived microbes. Candidate
food-derived microbes were isolated and identified by Sanger sequencing of the
16S rRNA gene (for bacteria; primers used were 27f, 5- AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG, and
1492r, 5-GGTTACCTTGTTACGACTT) or ITS region (for fungi; primers used were ITS1f,
5-CTTGGTCATTTAGAGGAAGTAA, and ITS4, 5-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC). After select
colonies had been picked for isolation, the surface of each plate was scraped
with a razor blade to collect all remaining colonies, and material was suspended
in PBS. Dilutions were pooled, and DNA was extracted from the resulting pooled
material using a PowerSoil kit (MoBio, Carlsbad, CA). The remaining pooled
material was stocked in 20% glycerol and stored at
−80°C.

Supplementary Material
1  2  3  4  Supplementary Information

Supplementary information is linked to the online version of the paper
at www.nature.com/nature.

Author contributions

LAD, RJD, and PJT designed the study, and developed and prepared the
diets. LAD, CFM, RNC, DBG, JEB, BEW, and PJT performed the experimental work.
AVL, ASD, YV, MAF, and SBB conducted bile acid analyses. LAD and PJT performed
computational analyses. LAD and PJT prepared the manuscript.

RNA-Seq data are deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database
(accession number GSE46761); 16S and ITS rRNA gene sequencing reads are
deposited in MG-RAST (project ID 6248). Reprints and permissions information are
available at www.nature.com/reprints. The authors have no competing
interests.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Andrew Murray, Guido Guidotti, Erin O’Shea,
Jeffrey Moffitt, and Bodo Stern for insightful comments; Mary Delaney (Harvard
Digestive Disease Core) for biochemical analyses; Christian Daly, Michele Clamp, and
Claire Reardon for sequencing support; N. Fierer for providing ITS primers; An Luong and Kylynda Bauer for technical
assistance; Jennifer Brulc and Ravi Menon (General Mills) for nutritional
guidelines; Atiqur Rahman for menu suggestions; Aviva Must and Jeanette Queenan for
nutritional analysis; and our diet study volunteers for their participation. This
work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (P50 GM068763), the Boston
Nutrition Obesity Research Center (DK0046200), and the General Mills Bell Institute
of Health and Nutrition, Minneapolis, MN.

Fig. 1 Short-term diet alters the gut microbiota
Ten subjects were tracked across each diet arm. (A) Fiber
intake on the plant-based diet rose from a median baseline value of
9.3±2.1 to 25.6±1.1 g/1,000kcal (p=0.007; two-sided Wilcoxon
signed-rank test), but was negligible on the animal-based diet (p=0.005).
(B) Daily fat intake doubled on the animal-based diet from a
baseline of 32.5±2.2% to 69.5±0.4% kcal
(p=0.005), but dropped on the plant-based diet to 22.1±1.7%
(p=0.02). (C) Protein intake rose on the animal-based diet to
30.1±0.5% kcal from a baseline level of
16.2±1.3% (p=0.005) and decreased on the plant-based diet to
10.0±0.3% (p=0.005). (D) Within-sample species
diversity (α-diversity, Shannon’s Diversity Index), did not
significantly change during either diet. (E) The similarity of each
individual’s gut microbiota to their baseline communities
(β-diversity, Jensen-Shannon distance) decreased on the animal-based
diet (dates with q<0.05 identified with asterisks; Bonferroni-corrected,
two-sided Mann-Whitney U test). Community differences were apparent one day
after a tracing dye showed the animal-based diet reached the gut (blue arrows
depict appearance of food dyes added to first and last diet day meals; Extended Data Fig.
3a).

Fig. 2 Bacterial cluster responses to diet arms
Cluster log2 fold-changes on each diet arm were computed relative to
baseline samples across all subjects and are drawn as circles. Clusters with
significant fold-changes on the animal-based diet are colored in red, and
clusters with significant fold-changes on both the plant- and animal-based diets
are colored in both red and green. Uncolored clusters exhibited no significant
fold-change on either the animal or plant-based diet (q<0.05, two-sided
Wilcoxon signed-rank test). Bacterial membership in the clusters with the three
largest positive and negative fold-changes on the animal-based diet are also
displayed and colored by phylum: Firmicutes (purple), Bacteroidetes (blue),
Proteobacteria (green), Tenericutes (red), and Verrucomicrobia (gray). Multiple
OTUs with the same name are counted in parentheses.

Fig. 3 Diet alters microbial activity and gene expression
Fecal concentrations of SCFAs from (A) carbohydrate and
(B) amino acid fermentation (*p<0.05, two-sided
Mann-Whitney U test; n=9–11 fecal samples/diet arm; Supplementary Table 11).
The animal-based diet was associated with significant increases in gene
expression (normalized to reads per kilobase per million mapped, or RPKM;
n=13–21 datasets/diet arm) among (C) glutamine
amidotransferases (K08681, vitamin B6 metabolism), (D)
methyltransferases (K00599, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon degradation), and
(E) beta-lactamases (K01467). (F) Hierarchical
clustering of gut microbial gene expression profiles collected on the
animal-based (red) and plant-based (green) diets. Expression profile similarity
was significantly associated with diet (p<0.003; two-sided
Fisher’s exact test excluding replicate samples), despite
inter-individual variation that preceded the diet (Extended Data Figs.
6a,b). Enrichment on animal-based diet (red) and plant-based diet (green)
for expression of genes involved in (G) amino acid metabolism and
(H) central metabolism. Numbers indicate the mean fold-change
between the two diets for each KEGG orthologous group assigned to a given
enzymatic reaction (Supplementary Table 17). Enrichment patterns on the animal- and
plant-based diets agree perfectly with patterns observed in carnivorous and
herbivorous mammals, respectively2 (p<0.001,
Binomial test). Note: Pyr Cx is represented by two groups, which showed
divergent fold-changes. Asterisks in panels C-E and
G,H indicate p<0.05, Student’s
t test. Values in panels A-E are mean±sem.
Abbreviations: glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH), glutamate decarboxylase (Glu Dx),
succinate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH), phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase
(PEPCx), pyruvate carboxylase (Pyr Cx), phosphotransferase system (PTS), PEP
carboxykinase (PEPCk), oxaloacetate decarboxylase (ODx), pyruvate,
orthophosphate dikinase (PPDk).

Fig. 4 Foodborne microbes are detectable in the distal gut
(A) Common bacteria and fungi associated with the
animal-based diet menu items, as measured by 16S rRNA and ITS gene sequencing,
respectively. Taxa are identified on the genus (g) and species (s) level. A full
list of foodborne fungi and bacteria on the animal-based diet can be found in
Supplementary Table
21. Foods on the plant-based diet were dominated by matches to the
Streptophyta, which derive from chloroplasts within plant matter (Extended Data Fig. 7a).
(B-E). Fecal RNA transcripts were significantly enriched
(q<0.1, Kruskal-Wallis test; n=6–10 samples/diet arm) for
several food-associated microbes on the animal-based diet relative to baseline
(BL) periods, including (B) Lactococcus lactis,
(C) Staphylococcus carnosus, (D)
Pediococcus acidilactici, and (E) a
Penicillium sp. A complete table of taxa with significant
expression differences can be found in Supplementary Table 22. (F) Fungal
concentrations in feces before and 1–2 days after the animal-based diet
were also measured using culture media selective for fungal growth (plate count
agar with milk, salt, and chloramphenicol). Post-diet fecal samples exhibit
significantly higher fungal concentrations than baseline samples
(p<0.02; two-sided Mann-Whitney U test; n=7–10 samples/diet
arm). (G) Increased RNA transcripts from the plant-derived Rubus chlorotic mottle virus transcripts increase on the plant-based diet (q<0.1, Kruskal-Wallis
test; n=6–10 samples/diet arm). Barplots (B-G) all display
mean±sem.

Fig. 5 Changes in the fecal concentration of bile acids and biomarkers for Bilophila
on the animal-based diet
(A) Deoxycholic acid, a secondary bile acid known to
promote DNA damage and hepatic carcinomas26, accumulates significantly on the animal-based diet
(p<0.01, two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test; see Supplementary Table 23
for the diet response of other secondary bile acids). (B) RNA-Seq
data also supports increased microbial metabolism of bile acids on the
animal-based diet, as we observe significantly increased expression of microbial
bile salt hydrolases (K01442) during that diet arm (q<0.05,
Kruskal-Wallis test; normalized to reads per kilobase per million mapped, or
RPKM; n=8–21 samples/diet arm). (C) Total fecal bile acid
concentrations also increase significantly on the animal-based diet, relative to
the preceding baseline period (p<0.05, two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank
test), but do not change on the plant-based diet (Extended Data Fig. 9).
Bile acids have been shown to cause IBD in mice by stimulating the growth of the
bacterium Bilophila6, which is known to reduce sulfite to hydrogen sulfide via
the sulfite reductase enzyme (dsrA; Extended Data Fig. 10). (D) Quantitative PCR
showed a significant increase in microbial DNA coding for dsrA on the
animal-based diet (p<0.05; two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test), and
(E) RNA-Seq identified a significant increase in sulfite
reductase expression (q<0.05, Kruskal-Wallis test; n=8–21
samples/diet arm). Barplots (B,E) display mean±sem.
==== Refs
References
1 Wu GD    Linking long-term dietary patterns with gut microbial
enterotypes Science 2011 334 105 108 21885731 
2 Muegge BD    Diet drives convergence in gut microbiome functions across
mammalian phylogeny and within humans Science 2011 332 970 974 21596990 
3 Duncan SH    Reduced dietary intake of carbohydrates by obese subjects results
in decreased concentrations of butyrate and butyrate-producing bacteria in
feces Appl Environ Microbiol 2007 73 1073 1078 17189447 
4 Ley RE  Turnbaugh PJ  Klein S  Gordon JI   Microbial ecology: human gut microbes associated with
obesity Nature 2006 444 1022 1023 17183309 
5 Walker AW    Dominant and diet-responsive groups of bacteria within the human
colonic microbiota ISME J 2011 5 220 230 20686513 
6 Devkota S    Dietary-fat-induced taurocholic acid promotes pathobiont
expansion and colitis in Il10−/− mice Nature 2012 487 104 108 22722865 
7 Turnbaugh PJ    The effect of diet on the human gut microbiome: a metagenomic
analysis in humanized gnotobiotic mice Sci Transl Med 2009 1 6ra14 
8 Turnbaugh PJ    An obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for
energy harvest Nature 2006 444 1027 1031 17183312 
9 Faith JJ  McNulty NP  Rey FE  Gordon JI   Predicting a human gut microbiota's response to diet in
gnotobiotic mice Science 2011 333 101 104 21596954 
10 Russell WR    High-protein, reduced-carbohydrate weight-loss diets promote
metabolite profiles likely to be detrimental to colonic
health Am J Clin Nutr 2011 93 1062 1072 21389180 
11 Cordain L    Plant-animal subsistence ratios and macronutrient energy
estimations in worldwide hunter-gatherer diets Am J Clin Nutr 2000 71 682 692 10702160 
12 Arumugam M    Enterotypes of the human gut microbiome Nature 2011 473 174 180 21508958 
13 De Filippo C    Impact of diet in shaping gut microbiota revealed by a
comparative study in children from Europe and rural Africa Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107 14691 14696 20679230 
14 Reddy BS   Diet and excretion of bile acids Cancer Res 1981 41 3766 3768 6266664 
15 Smith EA  Macfarlane GT   Enumeration of amino acid fermenting bacteria in the human large
intestine: effects of pH and starch on peptide metabolism and dissimilation
of amino acids FEMS Microbiol Ecol 1998 25 355 368 
16 Smith EA  Macfarlane GT   Enumeration of human colonic bacteria producing phenolic and
indolic compounds: effects of pH, carbohydrate availability and retention
time on dissimilatory aromatic amino acid metabolism J Appl Bacteriol 1996 81 288 302 8810056 
17 Sinha R    High concentrations of the carcinogen
2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) occur in chicken but
are dependent on the cooking method Cancer Res 1995 55 4516 4519 7553619 
18 PICRUSt (http://picrust.github.com ) 
19 Kanehisa M  Goto S   KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes Nucleic Acids Res 2000 28 27 30 10592173 
20 Pittard J  Wallace BJ   Distribution and function of genes concerned with aromatic
biosynthesis in Escherichia coli J Bacteriol 1966 91 1494 1508 5326114 
21 Hawkes K  O'Connell JF  Jones NG   Hunting income patterns among the Hadza: big game, common goods,
foraging goals and the evolution of the human diet Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 1991 334 243 250 discussion 250–241 1685582 
22 Bourdichon F  Berger B  Casaregola S   Safety Demonstration of Microbial Food Cultures (MFC) in
Fermented Food Products Bulletin of the International Dairy Federation 2012 455 
23 Nychas GJ  Arkoudelos JS   Staphylococci: their role in fermented sausages Soc Appl Bacteriol Symp Ser 1990 19 167S 188S 2119063 
24 McGavin WJ  Macfarlane SA   Rubus chlorotic mottle virus, a new sobemovirus infecting
raspberry and bramble Virus Res 2009 139 10 13 18929604 
25 Zhang T    RNA viral community in human feces: prevalence of plant
pathogenic viruses PLoS Biol 2006 4 e3 16336043 
26 Yoshimoto S    Obesity-induced gut microbial metabolite promotes liver cancer
through senescence secretome Nature 2013 499 97 101 23803760 
27 Ridlon JM  Kang DJ  Hylemon PB   Bile salt biotransformations by human intestinal
bacteria J Lipid Res 2006 47 241 259 16299351 
28 Islam KB    Bile acid is a host factor that regulates the composition of the
cecal microbiota in rats Gastroenterology 2011 141 1773 1781 21839040 
29 Maurice CF  Haiser HJ  Turnbaugh PJ   Xenobiotics shape the physiology and gene expression of the
active human gut microbiome Cell 2013 152 39 50 23332745 
30 Caporaso JG    QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community sequencing
data Nat Methods 2010 7 335 336 20383131 
References for Methods
1 Lewis SJ  Heaton KW   Stool form scale as a useful guide to intestinal transit
time Scand J Gastroenterol 1997 32 920 924 9299672 
2 Diet History Questionnaire, Version 2.0 2010 National Institutes of Health, Applied Research Program,
National Cancer Institute 
3 Caporaso JG    Global patterns of 16S rRNA diversity at a depth of millions of
sequences per sample Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011 108 Suppl 1 4516 4522 20534432 
4 Caporaso JG    Ultra-high-throughput microbial community analysis on the
Illumina HiSeq and MiSeq platforms ISME J 2012 6 1621 1624 22402401 
5 Caporaso JG    QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community sequencing
data Nat Methods 2010 7 335 336 
6 DeSantis TZ    Greengenes, a chimera-checked 16S rRNA gene database and
workbench compatible with ARB Appl Environ Microbiol 2006 72 5069 5072 16820507 
7 SciPy: Open source scientific tools for Python http://www.scipy.org/  
8 McKinney W   Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference 2010 
9 Strimmer K   fdrtool: a versatile R package for estimating local and tail
areabased false discovery rates Bioinformatics 2008 24 1461 1462 18441000 
10 Friedman J  Alm EJ   Inferring correlation networks from genomic survey
data PLoS Comput Biol 2012 8 e1002687 23028285 
11 Turnbaugh PJ    Organismal, genetic, and transcriptional variation in the deeply
sequenced gut microbiomes of identical twins Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107 7503 7508 20363958 
12 Maurice CF  Haiser HJ  Turnbaugh PJ   Xenobiotics shape the physiology and gene expression of the
active human gut microbiome Cell 2013 152 39 50 23332745 
13 Turnbaugh PJ    The effect of diet on the human gut microbiome: a metagenomic
analysis in humanized gnotobiotic mice Sci Transl Med 2009 1 6ra14 
14 Rey FE    Dissecting the in vivo metabolic potential of two human gut
acetogens J Biol Chem 2010 285 22082 22090 20444704 
15 Nelson KE    A catalog of reference genomes from the human
microbiome Science 2010 328 994 999 20489017 
16 Kanehisa M  Goto S   KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes Nucleic Acids Res 2000 28 27 30 10592173 
17 Ning Z  Cox AJ  Mullikin JC   SSAHA: a fast search method for large DNA
databases Genome Res 2001 11 1725 1729 11591649 
18 Abubucker S    Metabolic reconstruction for metagenomic data and its application
to the human microbiome PLoS Comput Biol 2012 8 e1002358 22719234 
19 Segata N    Metagenomic biomarker discovery and explanation Genome Biol 2011 12 R60 21702898 
20 Langmead B  Salzberg SL   Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2 Nat Methods 2012 9 357 359 22388286 
21 Markowitz VM    IMG: the Integrated Microbial Genomes database and comparative
analysis system Nucleic Acids Res 2012 40 D115 122 22194640 
22 Martin J    Optimizing read mapping to reference genomes to determine
composition and species prevalence in microbial communities PLoS ONE 2012 7 e36427 22719831 
23 Devkota S    Dietary-fat-induced taurocholic acid promotes pathobiont
expansion and colitis in Il10−/− mice Nature 2012 487 104 108 22722865 
24 Deplancke B    Molecular ecological analysis of the succession and diversity of
sulfate-reducing bacteria in the mouse gastrointestinal
tract Appl Environ Microbiol 2000 66 2166 2174 10788396 
25 Stewart JA  Chadwick VS  Murray A   Carriage, quantification, and predominance of methanogens and
sulfate-reducing bacteria in faecal samples Lett Appl Microbiol 2006 43 58 63 16834722 
26 Porter JL    Accurate enzymatic measurement of fecal bile acids in patients
with malabsorption J Lab Clin Med 2003 141 411 418 12819639 
27 Setchell KD  Lawson AM  Tanida N  Sjovall J   General methods for the analysis of metabolic profiles of bile
acids and related compounds in feces J Lipid Res 1983 24 1085 1100 6631236 
28 Schoch CL    Nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region as a
universal DNA barcode marker for Fungi 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012 109 6241 6246 22454494 
29 Gardes M  Bruns TD   ITS primers with enhanced specificity for
basidiomycetes--application to the identification of mycorrhizae and
rusts Mol Ecol 1993 2 113 118 8180733 
30 White TJ  Bruns T  Lee S  Taylor J   Gelfand Ma Innis Dh  Shinsky Jj  White Tj   PCR Protocols: A Guide to Methods and Applications 1990 315 322
